canary 24.10.22 Release Notes
=============================

.. contents::

``canary`` 2024.10.22 is the initial release of ``canary`` after about 1 year of development.

Features
--------

Test file types
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

``canary`` recognizes ``.pyt``, ``.vvt``, and ``CTestTestFile.cmake`` test generators.  Other test file generators can be enabled via plugin.

Asynchronous execution
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Test cases are run asynchronously using available resources.

Batched execution
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Test cases can be batched (a group of 1 or more tests) and submitted to a scheduler (``slurm``, ``lsf``, etc.)

Hierarchical parallelism
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Batches are run asynchronously and test cases within a batch are *also* run asynchronously.

Plugin system
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Many components of ``canary`` are enabled via plugin.  The builtin plugins include:

* commands;
* test file generators; and
* reporters.

Users can create their own plugins in files prefixed by ``nvest_`` and they can be automatically loaded by ``canary``.

Additionally, user plugins are called during different phases of test session execution.

Integration with other tools
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

``canary`` integrates with popular developer tools like :ref:`CMake <integrations-cmake>`, :ref:`CDash <integrations-cdash>`, and :ref:`GitLab <integrations-gitlab>`, streamlining the testing and continuous integration (CI) processes.

Documentation
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Extensive user documentation.  Developer documentation is in beginning stages.

Authors
-------

* Tim Fuller
* Dan Ibanez
