canary 2026.06.08 release notes
===============================

.. contents::

SYNOPSIS
--------

* This release covers the set of changes from April 2026 (sha 98de7fb3d99f66647c90a0e96fb37f1f6be59b15) to June 8, 2026 (sha 80f99b2b3c61622d856d2be0f45f7fe4ae3065f8).
* Work in this range focuses on the **TestCase → Job** migration, introduction of a new **JobSpec IR + dependency resolver** pipeline, a major **status model refactor**, improved **workspace/view semantics**, HPC batching enhancements, and substantial documentation and CI updates.

Highlights
----------

Core execution model
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

* Migrated core execution terminology and types from **TestCase** to **Job** across the codebase.
* Introduced :py:`_canary.job.BaseJob` and standardized queue/executor interactions around a job-phase lifecycle.
* Backward compatibility is preserved: :py:`canary.TestCase`` remains available as an alias of :py:`canary.Job`, so most existing client code does not need to change.

New spec pipeline and dependency resolution
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

* Added :py:`_canary.ir.JobSpecIR` for generator outputs that contain unresolved dependency selectors.
* Added :py:`_canary.jobspec.JobSpec` as the resolved, runnable spec format.
* Added :py:`_canary.resolve_dependency` to resolve dependency patterns/selectors into concrete spec dependencies.

Status system refactor
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

* Replaced legacy status tuple concepts with:
  * :py:`_canary.status.Category` (PASS/FAIL/SKIP/CANCEL/NONE)
  * :py:`_canary.status.Outcome` (SUCCESS/FAILED/TIMEOUT/…)
  * Updated :py:`_canary.status.Status` API (``category/outcome/reason/code``).
* Updated return-code aggregation and reporting logic to use the new model.

Persistence and DB updates
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

* Workspace DB now stores specs as JSON (instead of pickled blobs).
* Results schema updated to store **job_state** and new status fields; includes a migration helper for older DBs.

CLI and UX improvements
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

* Added ``canary exec`` subcommand to execute a single job/spec directly.
* Added view configuration controls:
  * New view settings (mode/when/only/name).
  * ``canary run --view key=value,...`` for per-run view behavior.
  * ``canary view refresh`` enhanced (mode/only/name).
* Improved parser behavior:
  * Nested subparser lookup via ``Parser.get_subparser("a::b::c")``.
  * New hooks: ``canary_cmdline_parse`` and ``canary_cmdline_modifyargs``.

Plugins and integrations
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

* Extracted former builtin PYT support into a new plugin package: **``canary_pyt``**.
* Refactored ``canary_vvtest`` to a similar "model/loader/adapter/emitter" architecture.
* Added builtin ``archive`` plugin: ``--archive NAME`` to tar/tgz selected artifacts post-run.
* GPU selection improvements:
  * ``--gpu-backend`` default changed to ``none``.
  * Added GPU selection config section and stricter backend selection logic.

HPC batching enhancements
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

* Batch specification defaults updated (notably default batching node constraints).
* Added explicit batch dependency construction from job dependency graphs.
* Batch objects now behave as jobs (implementing BaseJob interface).
* Added ``canary hpc log`` helper to page batch logs.

Docs and examples
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

* README updated to describe Canary as a general-purpose job/workflow execution framework.
* Added a large Sphinx reveal.js presentation under ``docs/presentations/HL``.
* Expanded tutorials:
  * Added batch spec documentation and extending-canary tutorial series.
  * Improved language around workspace/view behavior and job terminology.
* Added/updated API docs for new modules (``job``, ``jobspec``, ``ir``, ``resolve_dependency``, util modules, etc.).

CI and developer tooling
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

* Updated pytest paths and CI execution order; added ``src/canary_pyt/tests``.
* Enabled Ruff security selection (S324) in both GitHub Actions and GitLab CI.
* GitHub coverage steps currently commented out in workflow.
* Added ``bin/collect-release-data.sh`` helper script to generate deterministic release inputs from local git history.

Security / compliance
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

* Replaced MD5 hashing usage with SHA-256 in a few helper contexts.
* Added Ruff S324 checks (hashlib-related security guidance).

Detailed changes
----------------

Core / execution model
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

* Added :py:`_canary.job.Job`, :py:`_canary.job.BaseJob`, :py:`_canary.job.JobPhase`, :py:`_canary.job.JobState`.
* Updated conductor/executor/queue to operate on job phases and readiness rather than legacy testcase status states.
* Updated job execution path:
  * robust setup/run/finish error handling;
  * explicit job event recording (submitted/started/finished) for queue executor.

Specs, dependency resolution, and persistence
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

* Added :py:`_canary.ir.JobSpecIR` and :py:`_canary.resolve_dependency.resolve`.
* Updated generator system:
  * generators now emit JobSpecIR/JobSpec rather than legacy UnresolvedSpec/ResolvedSpec.
  * dependency resolution is handled in a dedicated module (with parallel resolution support).
* Workspace DB changes:
  * specs stored as JSON;
  * dependency reconstruction uses stored ordering to preserve edge positions;
  * migration routine for legacy ``results.status_state`` → ``results.job_state``.

Status system refactor
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

* Implemented enum-based status model in :py:`_canary.status`.
* Updated reporters (JUnit/Markdown/HTML/email/GitLab) to group and display based on new status fields.
* Updated returncode computation to use status category/outcome and job completion.

CLI and user experience
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

* New command: ``canary exec`` to execute a single job from a spec ID.
* View improvements:
  * new ``ViewSettings`` and ``ResultsView`` abstractions;
  * configurable view creation (mode/when/only) and rebuild behavior.
* Parser improvements:
  * nested subparser addressing via ``::`` notation;
  * new hooks for command line parse/modify steps.

Plugins and integrations
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

* Added ``canary_pyt`` plugin:
  * loader parses directives from .pyt files without executing tests;
  * adapter applies directives into a model;
  * lock emitter generates JobSpecIR entries (including analyze/composite base job).
* Refactored ``canary_vvtest`` to match the same architecture.
* Added builtin archive plugin:
  * archives job artifacts into tar/tgz; de-duplicates payload.
* GPU detection improvements:
  * updated selection logic; added config schema; clarified backend conflict behavior.
* YAML example generator updated:
  * uses schema validation;
  * emits ``command`` directly;
  * template substitution via :py:`string.Template`.

HPC batching / canary_hpc
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

* Batch spec defaults updated and documented (including layout/duration/count/nodes constraints).
* Introduced batch dependency construction and optional backend dependency usage.
* Batch objects implement BaseJob interface and emit job events consistent with queue executor.
* Added ``canary hpc log`` to display batch logs.

Docs and examples
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

* README refreshed with updated framing and improved developer instructions.
* Added HL presentation in Sphinx reveal.js format.
* Expanded tutorial and user docs:
  * clarified job terminology and updated examples;
  * added batch spec doc page;
  * added extending-canary tutorial series (job generator concepts, YAML generator worked example);
  * reorganized usage docs into “Integrations” sections (CMake/HPC/VVTest/GitLab).

CI / developer tooling
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

* GitHub workflow:
  * expanded pytest suites (canary_gitlab/canary_pyt/canary_vvtest ordering).
  * ruff: added ``--extend-select S324``.
  * coverage steps commented out.
* GitLab CI:
  * ruff-check updated to include ``--select S324``.
* Added ``bin/collect-release-data.sh`` utility for deterministic release data extraction.
* Updated internal check command to run pytest suites in parallel and extend ruff checks across more directories.

Security / compliance
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

* Switched MD5 hashing helpers to SHA-256 in select locations.
* Enabled Ruff S324 checks for hashing best practices.
