canary 2026.07.08 release notes
===============================

.. contents::

SYNOPSIS
--------

* This release covers the set of changes from June 8, 2026 (sha 80f99b2b3c61622d856d2be0f45f7fe4ae3065f8) to July 8, 2026 (sha 6cc5534ca6181082fa5ae7611119011ecd748cf6).
* Work in this range focuses on a major **resource-pool and allocation model refactor**, topology-aware multi-node resource handling, improved **view/report generation**, expanded HPC and distributed execution support, GPU visibility fixes, and additional directive/test coverage.

Highlights
----------

Topology-aware resource pools
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

* Reworked :py:`_canary.resource_pool.ResourcePool` from a flat local inventory into a topology-aware resource model.
* Added explicit node modeling through :py:`_canary.resource_pool.rpool.Node`.
* Resource pools now use a canonical layout with:
  * global ``additional_properties``;
  * a list of ``nodes``;
  * per-node resource inventories;
  * node-local resource IDs.
* Checked-out resources now preserve node identity by including a ``node`` field in resource specs.
* Added multi-node allocation semantics:
  * ``nodes=N`` requests N nodes;
  * non-node resource requests are interpreted as per-node requirements for multi-node allocations;
  * pools may disable multi-node checkout with ``allow_multinode=False``.
* Added helpers for resource counts, per-node counts, node IDs, aggregate resources, and node lookup.

Resource manager lifecycle
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

* Added :py:`_canary.resource_pool.manager.ResourceManager` to own the concrete resource pool for a configuration.
* :py:`_canary.config.Config` now constructs and manages resource pools lazily through the resource manager.
* Resource-manager state is included in configuration snapshots so subprocesses can reconstruct an already-discovered resource pool without rerunning discovery hooks.
* Resource-pool construction is now split into:
  * ``canary_resource_pool_fill`` for initial pool creation;
  * ``canary_resource_pool_update`` for composable post-processing and command-line overrides.
* ``canary config resource_pool`` / ``resources`` now describes the active pool through the resource manager.

Resource-pool CLI and schema updates
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

* Resource-pool schema support was updated for explicit topology-aware ``nodes`` entries.
* ``-r nodes=N`` can now set the number of topology nodes.
* ``-r TYPE=N`` applies resource-count overrides per node.
* ``slots_per_TYPE=N`` and ``--oversubscribe TYPE=N`` now operate over all matching node-local resources.
* Resource-pool file loading accepts:
  * a raw resource-pool payload; or
  * a top-level ``resource_pool`` payload.
* Resource-pool validation now catches invalid node counts, duplicate node IDs, invalid node slot overrides, and undefined resource types.

Job allocation model
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

* Job and batch allocation state now stores full allocation objects containing:
  * ``metadata``;
  * ``resources``.
* :py:`_canary.job.Job.assign_resources` and :py:`_canary.job.Job.free_resources` now preserve the full allocation structure.
* CPU/GPU environment variables are derived from the checked-out resource allocation.
* Job JSON serialization now records allocation data.
* Added compatibility/error messaging for the removed global ``config.resource_pool`` access path, steering users toward plugin-manager resource-pool hooks.

View and reporting improvements
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

* Moved view management into a dedicated :py:`_canary.view` module.
* Added :py:`_canary.view.ViewManager` for live, incremental view updates while jobs finish.
* Added manifest-backed views:
  * :py:`_canary.view.ViewManifest`;
  * :py:`_canary.view.ViewManifestEntry`;
  * per-view metadata under ``_canary``.
* View updates are protected by a workspace-level lock to support concurrent or re-entrant updates.
* Views now support configured report generation at finish/rebuild time.
* Added ``--report`` support to ``canary run`` for selecting final view report formats.
* Added :py:`_canary.hookspec.canary_view_report` for view-level report generation.

Reporter updates
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

* Updated report plugins to support both standalone report commands and view-level reports.
* HTML, Markdown, JSON, and JUnit reporters can now load jobs represented by the current view manifest.
* HTML reporting was substantially refreshed:
  * styled summary page;
  * status cards;
  * grouped result pages;
  * per-job pages with metadata, measurements, and output.
* Markdown reporting now writes grouped indexes and per-job detail pages.
* JSON and JUnit reporting now write atomically via temporary files.
* Report commands support direct forms such as:
  * ``canary report html``;
  * ``canary report markdown``;
  * ``canary report json``;
  * ``canary report junit``.
* Compatibility spellings such as ``canary report junit create`` remain available.

HPC batching and resource handling
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

* HPC execution now builds topology-aware resource pools from scheduler/backend information.
* HPC batch workspaces now receive a batch-local ``resource_pool.json`` describing allocated resources.
* Batch-local resource pools preserve:
  * node count;
  * backend name;
  * per-node resource counts;
  * node-local CPU/GPU/custom resources.
* :py:`canary_hpc.batchspec.TestBatch` now stores and serializes full resource allocations.
* HPC batch checkout/checkin now operates on full allocation objects.
* ``nodes`` resource requests are supported and can be expanded into per-node resources for batch execution.
* Added validation that the active resource manager backend matches the requested HPC backend.
* Added batch tests covering allocation state, checkin/free behavior, and lockfile persistence.
* ``canary hpc log`` remains available for paging batch logs.

Distributed execution
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

* Added the new ``canary_dist`` plugin package for distributed-pool execution.
* Added ``canary dist`` subcommands:
  * ``canary dist status``;
  * ``canary dist run``;
  * ``canary dist exec``.
* Added distributed resource-pool adapter support for communicating with a pool server.
* Distributed pool state is translated into Canary's topology-aware resource-pool model.
* Distributed checkouts preserve metadata such as:
  * source;
  * server URL;
  * hostname;
  * transaction ID.
* Added distributed batch execution support through ``hpc_connect`` remote subprocess backends.
* Distributed batch workspaces write batch-local resource-pool state for remote execution.
* Added status display helpers for distributed resource-pool state.

GPU selection and visibility
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

* GPU resources now include explicit properties such as vendor, UUID, model, and name where available.
* GPU discovery fills node-local GPU resource IDs suitable for runtime visibility variables.
* NVIDIA runtime setup now sets ``CUDA_VISIBLE_DEVICES`` from checked-out NVIDIA or unknown GPU resources.
* AMD runtime setup now sets:
  * ``HIP_VISIBLE_DEVICES``;
  * ``ROCR_VISIBLE_DEVICES``;
  * ``CUDA_VISIBLE_DEVICES``.
* GPU visibility hooks avoid overriding user-provided environment variables or preexisting case variables.
* Multi-node GPU allocations preserve node-local device ID semantics and de-duplicate visible IDs as needed.
* Added focused tests for AMD and NVIDIA GPU selection behavior.

PYT directives and test metadata
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

* Added resource directives for ``.pyt`` tests:
  * :py:`canary.directives.cpus`;
  * :py:`canary.directives.gpus`;
  * :py:`canary.directives.nodes`.
* Resource directives are stored as meta-parameters so they affect scheduling without changing parameterized test names.
* Added support for PYT meta-parameters in generated :py:`_canary.ir.JobSpecIR` instances.
* Added :py:`canary.directives.artifact(..., save_on=...)` spelling for artifact save policy.
* Test instances now include spec attributes when converted through :py:`_canary.testinst`.
* Composite/analyze-only handling now accounts for parameters and meta-parameters when building multi-instance parameter tables.

Docs and examples
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

* README documentation link now targets the production documentation site.
* API docs updated for:
  * built-in archive plugin;
  * built-in CLI plugin;
  * subcommand ``exec``;
  * resource-pool manager;
  * view support;
  * ``canary_vvtest.vvt``.
* Added or restored example tests for:
  * artifacts;
  * attributes;
  * exclusive execution;
  * owners;
  * CPU resources;
  * skipif behavior;
  * testname behavior;
  * VVTest include files.
* API documentation generation script updated to include the current package/module set.

CI and container tests
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

* Docker-based Flux, PBS, and Slurm test scripts now create JUnit and CDash report artifacts at the end of execution.
* Flux container tests were expanded with additional batch-spec coverage:
  * ``count:3,layout:atomic,nodes:any``;
  * ``count:auto,layout:flat,nodes:any``.
* Internal check command test paths were updated to include AMD, NVIDIA, and distributed plugin tests.
* Pyproject test paths and coverage command line were updated for the expanded plugin set.

Detailed changes
----------------

Resource pool / allocation model
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

* Added :py:`_canary.resource_pool.manager.ResourceManager`.
* Added :py:`_canary.resource_pool.rpool.Node`.
* Reworked :py:`_canary.resource_pool.rpool.ResourcePool` to manage one or more nodes.
* Added node-aware methods:
  * ``node_ids``;
  * ``get_node``;
  * ``first_node``;
  * ``ensure_node``;
  * ``add_node``;
  * ``rebuild_node_index``.
* Added resource-count helpers:
  * ``count``;
  * ``count_by_node``;
  * ``slots_available``;
  * ``slots_by_node``;
  * ``count_per_node``.
* Added support for:
  * single-node colocated checkout;
  * multi-node checkout;
  * per-node resource request interpretation;
  * allocation rollback on failed checkout;
  * aggregate resource views.
* Added :py:`_canary.resource_pool.rpool.ResourceUnavailable` handling for unknown resources, unknown nodes, and heterogeneous per-node counts.
* Added :py:`_canary.resource_pool.rpool.EmptyResourcePoolError` behavior for empty pools.
* Resource-pool tests were expanded substantially for schema validation, checkout/checkin, colocated resources, multi-node requests, node counts, and error handling.

Config and plugin hooks
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

* :py:`_canary.config.Config` now initializes a :py:`ResourceManager`.
* Configuration load/snapshot/restore paths now clear or restore resource-manager state.
* Config snapshots include resource-manager state so subprocesses can use the resolved pool.
* Removed the old direct global resource-pool behavior in favor of managed resource pools.
* Updated resource-pool hooks:
  * ``canary_resource_pool_fill`` now returns the initial pool specification;
  * ``canary_resource_pool_update`` mutates an existing pool.
* Added resource-pool update hooks for GPU discovery and command-line resource modifiers.

Views and workspace behavior
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

* Added a dedicated :py:`_canary.view` module containing:
  * :py:`ViewSettings`;
  * :py:`ResultsView`;
  * :py:`ViewManifest`;
  * :py:`ViewManager`;
  * :py:`ViewReportRequest`.
* Workspace run flow now starts a view manager before executing a session and finalizes it afterward.
* Live job-finished events update the DB listener and synchronize the view.
* View rebuild now uses the view manager and preserves/restores previous views on failure.
* View reports are generated through the new ``canary_view_report`` hook.
* View settings now include report-format selection with default ``html``.

Reporters
^^^^^^^^^

* Added view-report support to:
  * HTML reporter;
  * Markdown reporter;
  * JSON reporter;
  * JUnit reporter.
* Added request objects for report rendering:
  * ``HTMLReportRequest``;
  * ``MarkdownReportRequest``;
  * ``JsonReportRequest``;
  * ``JunitReportRequest``.
* Reporters can load jobs from view manifest entries and ``testcase.lock`` files.
* HTML reporter now writes:
  * ``index.html``;
  * grouped summary pages;
  * per-job pages;
  * a view-level ``summary.html`` symlink.
* Markdown reporter now writes:
  * ``index.md``;
  * grouped summary pages;
  * per-job pages.
* JSON and JUnit reporters support configurable output files and atomic replacement.
* Reporter command registration now uses ``canary_reporter`` and reporter-specific argument parsing.

HPC and distributed execution
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

* Added topology-aware resource-pool generation for HPC backends.
* HPC conductor now validates that the resource manager was initialized for the requested backend.
* HPC batch runner now writes the resolved resource-manager state into batch configuration snapshots.
* Batch-local execution loads resource-pool state from ``resource_pool.json``.
* Added support for distributed execution through ``canary_dist``:
  * distributed conductor;
  * distributed executor;
  * distributed resource-pool adapter;
  * distributed queue wrapper;
  * distributed batch spec;
  * distributed status printer.
* Distributed execution supports machine filtering by tags and groups.
* Distributed checkouts use server-authoritative allocation and release by transaction ID.
* Added distributed tests for adapter translation, checkout/checkin behavior, batch-local pool construction, and queue checkin.

GPU plugins
^^^^^^^^^^^

* GPU resource specs now preserve vendor and device metadata under ``properties``.
* AMD plugin now recognizes AMD/ROCm resources and sets appropriate runtime visibility variables.
* NVIDIA plugin now recognizes NVIDIA and unknown GPU resources.
* GPU hooks avoid overriding user-specified visibility variables.
* Added tests for:
  * AMD vendor handling;
  * ROCm vendor handling;
  * NVIDIA vendor handling;
  * unknown GPU resources;
  * multi-node local-ID de-duplication;
  * user environment override behavior.

PYT and directives
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

* Added PYT model support for meta-parameters.
* Added resource-parameter handling for ``cpus``, ``gpus``, and ``nodes``.
* Added public directive documentation for :py:`canary.directives.nodes`.
* Resource directives validate integer type and minimum value.
* PYT lock emission now includes meta-parameters in generated IR.
* Template substitution can use both parameters and meta-parameters.
* Artifact directive spelling uses ``save_on`` for save policy.

Docs, tests, and cleanup
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

* Updated API docs for renamed/added modules.
* Added tests for resource-pool topology behavior and GPU selection.
* Added tests for HPC batch allocation persistence.
* Updated reporter tests for direct reporter commands and view-generated reports.
* Updated integration tests to expect view metadata and generated summaries.
* Added example files exercising additional directives and VVTest include support.
* Updated pyproject test paths, coverage paths, mypy exclusions, and ty exclusions for the expanded plugin/test layout.
